[DOCU-2921] Status endpoint + Kong health  check (#5419)
Kong/docs.konghq.com: app/_src/gateway/production/monitoring/health-check.md

---

> title: Health Check

Reviewer: Ditto

content_type: tutorial
---

This tutorial will guide you through the process of using the Node Readiness Endpoint, which provides a reliable and simple way to determine if Kong is ready to serve user requests.

The health check endpoint returns a `200 OK` response when Kong is ready, or a `503 Service Temporarily Unavailable` response when it's not. This is useful for load balancers and other tools that need to monitor the readiness of Kong instances.

Note that the readiness endpoint does not return detailed node health information such as the
amount of memory Kong node is using. You might want to check out the [`/status` API](/gateway/{{page.kong_version}}/admin-api/#retrieve-node-status) as well.

## Prerequisites

* Kong installed
* Basic understanding of Kong configuration and deployment modes (Traditional, DB-less, and Hybrid)

> ## Understanding the Node Readiness Endpoint

Reviewer 2: There is no section about `hybrid` mode

Before diving into the steps, it's important to understand the purpose of the Node Readiness Endpoint and how it determines whether a Kong instance is ready or not.

### Traditional mode

In Traditional mode, the endpoint returns `200 OK` when all of the following conditions are met:

1. Successful connection to the database
2. Successful initial build of all routers for all workers
3. Successful initial build of all plugin iterators for all workers

> ### DB-less mode (`data_plane` role)

Reviewer 2: Isn't in DB-less mode the `kong_role=traditional; database=off`?

Reviewer: Second that, the title is not right.

Reviewer 3: How about "Hybrid mode (`data_plane` role) and DB-less mode "

In DB-less mode, the endpoint returns `200 OK` when all of the following conditions are met:

> 1. Kong has loaded a valid and non-empty config

Reviewer 3: It means `kong.yaml`, which includes some valid entities.

2. Successful initial build of all routers for all workers
3. Successful initial build of all plugin iterators for all workers

## Enabling the Status Endpoint

In order to use the Node Readiness Endpoint, make sure that you have enabled the Status API Server via the [status_listen](/gateway/{{page.kong_version}}/reference/configuration/#status_listen) configuration parameter.

Example `kong.conf`:

```conf
status_listen = 0.0.0.0:8100
```

## Using the Node Readiness Endpoint

Once you've enabled the Node Readiness Endpoint, you can send a GET request to it to check the readiness of your Kong instance:

```sh
# Replace `<status-api-host>` with the appropriate host for
# your Status API server, including the port number

> curl -i <status-api-host>/status/ready

Reviewer 4: I think we are missing a new page for the entire Status API as added by https://github.com/Kong/kong/pull/4977 - and of which `/status/ready` is now a part of. Currently, `/status` is only documented in https://docs.konghq.com/gateway/latest/reference/configuration/#status_listen. A more accurate representation would be to have `/status/` and `/status/ready` in a new overall page separate from "Admin API" too. If the user configures `status_listen`, there will be a separate port for status checking that includes both `/status/` and `/status/ready`.

## Understanding the Node Readiness Endpoint

Before diving into the steps, it's important to understand the purpose of the Node Readiness Endpoint and how it determines whether a Kong instance is ready or not.

### Traditional mode

In Traditional mode, the endpoint returns 200 OK when all of the following conditions are met:

1. Successful connection to the database
2. Successful initial build of all routers for all workers
3. Successful initial build of all plugin iterators for all workers

### DB-less mode (`data_plane` role)

In DB-less mode, the endpoint returns 200 OK when all of the following conditions are met:

1. Kong has loaded a valid and non-empty config
2. Successful initial build of all routers for all workers
3. Successful initial build of all plugin iterators for all workers

## Enabling the Status Endpoint

In order to use the Node Readiness Endpoint, make sure that you have enabled the Status API Server via the [status_listen](https://docs.konghq.com/gateway/latest/reference/configuration/#status_listen) configuration parameter.

Example `kong.conf`:

    ```conf
    status_listen = 0.0.0.0:8100
    ```

## Using the Node Readiness Endpoint

> Once you've configured the Node Readiness Endpoint, you can send requests to it to check the readiness of your Kong instance.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Once you've enabled the Node Readiness Endpoint, you can send requests to it to check the readiness of your Kong instance.
```

## Prerequisites

* Kong installed
* Basic understanding of Kong configuration and deployment modes (Traditional, DB-less, and Hybrid)

## Understanding the Status Endpoint

Before diving into the steps, it's important to understand the purpose of the Status Endpoint and how it determines whether a Kong instance is ready or not.

### Traditional mode

In Traditional mode, the conditions that must be fulfilled simultaneously for the traditional mode are: 

1. Successful connection to the database
2. Successful initial build of all routers for all workers
3. Successful initial build of all plugin iterators for all workers

### DB-less mode (data_plane role)

In DB-less mode, the endpoint returns 200 OK when all of the following conditions are met:

1. The current configuration hash is not nil and not all zeros

> 2. Successful initial build or a rebuild of all routers for all workers
> 3. Successful initial build or a rebuild of all plugin iterators for all workers

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Successful initial build or rebuild of all routers for all workers
3. Successful initial build or rebuild of all plugin iterators for all workers
```

## Configuring the Status Endpoint

To configure the Status Endpoint in your Kong instance, follow these steps:

1. Ensure that Kong is installed and running on your system.
2. Open the Kong configuration file (e.g., `kong.conf` or `kong.yml`).
3. Make sure the Status API is enabled by including the following line:

>     ```yaml

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    ```conf
```

---
title: Health Check
content_type: tutorial
---

This tutorial will guide you through the process of setting up and using the new Kong Status endpoint, which provides a more reliable and simple way to determine if Kong is ready to serve requests. The endpoint will return a 200 OK response when Kong is ready, or a 503 Service Unavailable response when it's not. This is useful for load balancers and other tools that need to monitor the readiness of Kong instances.

## Prerequisites

* Kong installed
* Basic understanding of Kong configuration and deployment modes (Traditional, DB-less, and Hybrid)

## Understanding the Status Endpoint

Before diving into the steps, it's important to understand the purpose of the Status Endpoint and how it determines whether a Kong instance is ready or not.

### Traditional mode

> In Traditional mode, the endpoint returns 200 OK when the Kong database connection is successful. Otherwise, it returns 503.

Reviewer 6: This doesn't seem right. @dndx ?

Reviewer 7: Updated

---
title: Health Check
content_type: tutorial
---

> This tutorial will guide you through the process of using the new Kong Status endpoint, which provides a more reliable and simple way to determine if Kong is ready to serve requests.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
This tutorial will guide you through the process of using the new Node Readiness Endpoint, which provides a more reliable and simple way to determine if Kong is ready to serve user requests.
```

Some consistencies in what this should be called is probably a good thing. Suggest we use "Node Readiness Endpoint" from now on.

Specifically, "Status endpoint" is a confusing name because we have a couple of "status endpoints", including `/status`.

> To put it simply, health check endpoint will return a 200 OK response when Kong is ready, or a 503 Service Unavailable response when it's not. This is useful for load balancers and other tools that need to monitor the readiness of Kong instances.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To put it simply, health check endpoint will return a `200 OK` response when Kong is ready, or a `503 Service Unavailable` response when it's not. This is useful for load balancers and other tools that need to monitor the readiness of Kong instances.
```

> To put it simply, health check endpoint will return a `200 OK` response when Kong is ready, or a `503 Service Unavailable` response when it's not. This is useful for load balancers and other tools that need to monitor the readiness of Kong instances.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
To put it simply, health check endpoint will return a `200 OK` response when Kong is ready, or a `503 Service Unavailable` response when it's not. This is useful for load balancers and other tools that need to monitor the readiness of Kong instances.

Note that the readiness endpoint does not return detailed node health information such as the
amount of memory Kong node is using. You might want to check out the [`/status` API](/gateway/{{page.kong_version}}/admin-api/#retrieve-node-status) as well.
```

## Prerequisites

* Kong installed
* Basic understanding of Kong configuration and deployment modes (Traditional, DB-less, and Hybrid)

> ## Understanding the Status Endpoint

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
## Understanding the Node Readiness Endpoint
```

> Before diving into the steps, it's important to understand the purpose of the Status Endpoint and how it determines whether a Kong instance is ready or not.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Before diving into the steps, it's important to understand the purpose of the Node Readiness Endpoint and how it determines whether a Kong instance is ready or not.
```

### Traditional mode

In Traditional mode, the conditions that must be fulfilled simultaneously for the traditional mode are: 

1. Successful connection to the database
2. Successful initial build of all routers for all workers
3. Successful initial build of all plugin iterators for all workers

> ### DB-less mode (data_plane role)

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
### DB-less mode (`data_plane` role)
```

In DB-less mode, the endpoint returns 200 OK when all of the following conditions are met:

> 1. The current configuration hash is not nil and not all zeros

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
1. Kong has loaded a valid and non-empty config
```

> 2. Successful initial build/rebuild of all routers for all workers
> 3. Successful initial build/rebuild of all plugin iterators for all workers

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
2. Successful initial build of all routers for all workers
3. Successful initial build of all plugin iterators for all workers
```

## Configuring the Status Endpoint

To configure the Status Endpoint in your Kong instance, follow these steps:

1. Ensure that Kong is setup.
2. Open the Kong configuration file (e.g., `kong.conf` or `kong.yml`).

> 3. Make sure the Status API is enabled by including the following line:

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
3. Make sure the Status API server is enabled by including the following line:
```

    ```conf
    status_listen = 0.0.0.0:8100
    ```

>     This will make the Status API listen on port 8100. You can change the port number to any available port on your system.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
    This will make the Status API server listen on port `8100` on all interfaces of the system. You can change the port number to any available port on your system.
```

4. Save the configuration file and restart Kong to apply the changes.

    ```shell
    kong reload
    ```
    
You can also use `KONG_STATUS_LISTEN` environment variable to configure it.

> ## Using the Status Endpoint

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
## Using the Node Readiness Endpoint
```

> Once you've configured the Status Endpoint, you can send requests to it to check the readiness of your Kong instance.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Once you've configured the Node Readiness Endpoint, you can send requests to it to check the readiness of your Kong instance.
```

> 1. Send a GET request to the `/status/ready` endpoint. Replace `<status-api-url>` with the appropriate URL for your Status API, including the port number:

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
1. Send a GET request to the `/status/ready` endpoint. Replace `<status-api-host>` with the appropriate host for your Status API server, including the port number:
```

    ```shell

>     curl -I <status-api-url>/status/ready

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
    curl -I <status-api-host>/status/ready
```

    ```

> 2. If the response is `200 OK`, your Kong instance is ready to serve requests. If the response is `503 Service Unavailable`, Kong is still loading the configuration or has failed to load it.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
2. If the response is `200 OK`, your Kong instance is ready to serve requests. If the response is `503 Service Unavailable`, Kong does not yet have a valid configuration.
```

## Updating Readiness Probes

> If you're using Kubernetes or Helm, you may need to update the readiness probe configuration to use the new Status Endpoint. Modify the `readinessProbe` section in your configuration file to look like this:

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
If you're using Kubernetes or Helm, you may need to update the readiness probe configuration to use the new Node Readiness Endpoint. Modify the `readinessProbe` section in your configuration file to look like this:
```

```yaml
readinessProbe:
    httpGet:
        path: /status/ready
        port: 8100
    initialDelaySeconds: 10
    periodSeconds: 5
```

> Make sure to replace the port number with the one you configured for the Status API.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Make sure to replace the port number with the one you configured for the Status API Server.
```

---
title: Health Check
content_type: tutorial
---

> This tutorial will guide you through the process of using the new Node Readiness Endpoint, which provides a more reliable and simple way to determine if Kong is ready to serve user requests.

Reviewer 5: 1. The endpoint will only be "new" for so long, so we have concrete plans to update this doc in ~2-3 months (whenever then next release is), I suggest dropping `new` here.
2. `more reliable` sounds like a comparison, but the doc isn't actually comparing the Node Readiness Endpoint to anything.

```suggestion
This tutorial will guide you through the process of using the Node Readiness Endpoint, which provides a reliable and simple way to determine if Kong is ready to serve user requests.
```

> To put it simply, health check endpoint will return a `200 OK` response when Kong is ready, or a `503 Service Unavailable` response when it's not. This is useful for load balancers and other tools that need to monitor the readiness of Kong instances.

Reviewer 5: 1. `To put it simply` feels like filler here. I think the sentence is perfectly clear without it
2. Subjectively, I think `returns` is more apt than `will return`, but `will return` is fine with me if you think it is better

```suggestion
The health check endpoint returns a `200 OK` response when Kong is ready, or a `503 Service Unavailable` response when it's not. This is useful for load balancers and other tools that need to monitor the readiness of Kong instances.
```

Note that the readiness endpoint does not return detailed node health information such as the
amount of memory Kong node is using. You might want to check out the [`/status` API](/gateway/{{page.kong_version}}/admin-api/#retrieve-node-status) as well.

## Prerequisites

* Kong installed
* Basic understanding of Kong configuration and deployment modes (Traditional, DB-less, and Hybrid)

## Understanding the Node Readiness Endpoint

Before diving into the steps, it's important to understand the purpose of the Node Readiness Endpoint and how it determines whether a Kong instance is ready or not.

### Traditional mode

> In Traditional mode, the conditions that must be fulfilled simultaneously for the traditional mode are: 

Reviewer 5: I suggest similar wording to the DB-less description:

```suggestion
In Traditional mode, the endpoint returns 200 OK when all of the following conditions are met:
```

1. Successful connection to the database
2. Successful initial build of all routers for all workers
3. Successful initial build of all plugin iterators for all workers

### DB-less mode (`data_plane` role)

In DB-less mode, the endpoint returns 200 OK when all of the following conditions are met:

1. Kong has loaded a valid and non-empty config
2. Successful initial build of all routers for all workers
3. Successful initial build of all plugin iterators for all workers

> ## Configuring the Status Endpoint
> 
> To configure the Status Endpoint in your Kong instance, follow these steps:
> 
> 1. Ensure that Kong is setup.
> 2. Open the Kong configuration file (e.g., `kong.conf` or `kong.yml`).
> 3. Make sure the Status API server is enabled by including the following line:
> 
>     ```conf
>     status_listen = 0.0.0.0:8100
>     ```
> 
>     This will make the Status API server listen on port `8100` on all interfaces of the system. You can change the port number to any available port on your system.
> 
> 4. Save the configuration file and restart Kong to apply the changes.
> 
>     ```shell
>     kong reload
>     ```
>     
> You can also use `KONG_STATUS_LISTEN` environment variable to configure it.

Reviewer 5: This is all subjective, but I feel that these procedural instructions are overly verbose. I understand that it's a tutorial and not a reference, but our audience is someone who is already using Kong, so setting a particular configuration parameter should be well-understood to them.

Here is what I suggest instead:

```suggestion
## Enabling the Status Endpoint

In order to use the Node Readiness Endpoint, you must first enable the Status API Server via the [status_listen](https://docs.konghq.com/gateway/latest/reference/configuration/#status_listen) configuration parameter.

Example:

    ```conf
    # kong.conf
    status_listen = 0.0.0.0:8100
    ```
```

## Using the Node Readiness Endpoint

Once you've configured the Node Readiness Endpoint, you can send requests to it to check the readiness of your Kong instance.

> 1. Send a GET request to the `/status/ready` endpoint. Replace `<status-api-host>` with the appropriate host for your Status API server, including the port number:
> 
>     ```shell
>     curl -I <status-api-host>/status/ready
>     ```
> 
> 2. If the response is `200 OK`, your Kong instance is ready to serve requests. If the response is `503 Service Unavailable`, Kong does not yet have a valid configuration.

Reviewer 5: I think this section could be improved by removing the multiple steps and adding an example of each response:

```suggestion
Send a GET request to the `/status/ready` endpoint. Replace `<status-api-host>` with the appropriate host for your Status API server, including the port number:

    ```shell
    curl -i <status-api-host>/status/ready
    ```

If the response is `200 OK`, your Kong instance is ready to serve requests:

    ```
    HTTP/1.1 200 OK
    Date: Thu, 04 May 2023 22:00:52 GMT
    Content-Type: application/json; charset=utf-8
    Connection: keep-alive
    Access-Control-Allow-Origin: *
    Content-Length: 19
    X-Kong-Admin-Latency: 3
    Server: kong/3.3.0

    {"message":"ready"}
    ```

If the response is `503 Service Unavailable`, your Kong instance is unhealthy and/or not yet ready to serve requests:

    ```
    HTTP/1.1 503 Service Temporarily Unavailable
    Date: Thu, 04 May 2023 22:01:11 GMT
    Content-Type: application/json; charset=utf-8
    Connection: keep-alive
    Access-Control-Allow-Origin: *
    Content-Length: 43
    X-Kong-Admin-Latency: 3
    Server: kong/3.3.0

    {"message":"failed to connect to database"}
    ```

    ```
    HTTP/1.1 503 Service Temporarily Unavailable
    Date: Thu, 04 May 2023 22:06:58 GMT
    Content-Type: application/json; charset=utf-8
    Connection: keep-alive
    Access-Control-Allow-Origin: *
    Content-Length: 70
    X-Kong-Admin-Latency: 16
    Server: kong/3.3.0

    {"message":"no configuration available (empty configuration present)"}
    ```

```
